README.md, before:

alicat
======

TCP/Serial driver and command line tool for
[Alicat Laminar DP mass flow controllers](https://www.alicat.com/gas-products/laminar-dp-mass-flow-meters-and-controllers/).

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://www.alicat.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/M_MC_Pair.webp" height="400" />
</p>

*If you are using Analyt-MTC flow controllers, go to [this repository](https://github.com/schlenzmeister/AnalytMTC/wiki) for more info.*
*This driver does not currently support CODA or BASIS controllers.*

Example Connections
===================

| Type | Usage |
| --- | --- |
| The standard [DB9 cable](https://store.alicat.com/collections/communication-cables/products/md8db9-8-pin-mini-din-to-serial-adapter-cable) connected directly to a computer (unix: `/dev/ttyS0`, windows: `COM1`). | Good with older computers that still have the connector. |
| The cable connected to a computer through a [USB converter](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0007T27H8) (unix: `/dev/ttyUSB0`, windows: `COM1`). | Good for newer computers and maker boards such as Raspberry Pis. |
| Multiple cables connected to one port via a [splitter](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007F2E188) and Alicat's addressing (`A`-`Z`). | Good when number of ports is limited. |
| Cables routed through a [TCP device server](https://www.usconverters.com/serial-rs232-ethernet-converter) (`192.168.1.100:23`).

Installation
============

```
pip install alicat
```

Usage
=====

## Command Line

For basic tasks, this driver includes a command-line interface. Read the help
for more.

```
alicat --help
```

## Python
This uses Python ≥3.5's async/await syntax to asynchronously communicate with an Alicat. For example:

```python
import asyncio
from alicat import FlowController

async def get():
    async with FlowController('ip-address:port') as flow_controller:
        print(await flow_controller.get())

asyncio.run(get())
#  If there is already an event loop (e.g. Jupyter), replace the above line with:
#  sawait get()
```

If the flow controller is communicating on the specified port, this should
return a dictionary of the form:

```python
{
  'setpoint': 0.0,         # Setpoint, either mass flow rate or pressure
  'control_point': 'flow', # Either 'flow' or 'pressure'
  'gas': 'Air',            # Can be any option in `flow_controller.gases`
  'mass_flow': 0.0,        # Mass flow (in units specified at time of purchase)
  'pressure': 25.46,       # Pressure (normally in psia)
  'temperature': 23.62,    # Temperature (normally in C)
  'total_flow': 0.0,       # Optional. If totalizer function purchased, will be included
  'volumetric_flow': 0.0   # Volumetric flow (in units specified at time of purchase)
}
```

On flow controllers, you can set the flow or pressure setpoints.

```python
await flow_controller.set_flow_rate(1.0)
await flow_controller.set_pressure(20)
```

### Gas Type

You can set the gas type by name or by index. For more on setting by index, see the gas table in your Alicat's manual.

```python
await flow_controller.set_gas('N2')
await flow_controller.set_gas(8)
```

For firmware 5v and greater, you can create and set gas mixes. Mixes can contain up to five gases and are stored in gas indices 236-255.

```python
await flow_controller.create_mix(mix_no=236, name="Mix1", gases={'N2': 50, 'O2': 30, 'CO2': 20})
await flow_controller.set_gas(236)
await flow_controller.delete_mix(236)
```

### PID Parameters

For flow controllers, read and write PID loop settings for device tuning.

```python
await flow_controller.set_pid(p=4000, i=4000, d=10, loop_type='PD2I')
print(await flow_controller.get_pid())
{
    'loop_type': 'PD2I',
    'P': '4000',
    'I': '4000',
    'D': '10',
}
```

### Other Features

Additional features include override commands to increase device functionality.

```python
await flow_controller.lock()            # Lock the front display.
await flow_controller.unlock()          # Unlock the front display.
await flow_controller.hold()            # Hold the valve in its current position.
await flow_controller.cancel_hold()     # Cancel the valve hold.
await flow_controller.tare_volumetric() # Tare volumetric flow.
await flow_controller.tare_pressure()   # Tare pressure.
await flow_controller.reset_totalizer() # Reset totalizer, if totalizer functionality included.
```

### Addressing

You can have multiple controllers on the same port by using Alicat's `A`-`Z` addresses
and an [RS-232 splitter](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007F2E188).

```python
flow_controller_1 = FlowController(address='A')
flow_controller_2 = FlowController(address='B')

await flow_controller_1.set_flow_rate(1.0)
await flow_controller_2.set_flow_rate(0.5)

await flow_controller_1.close() # /dev/ttyUSB0 is still open!
await flow_controller_2.close()
```

### Breaking changes

`0.5.0`
- Support only `asyncio`.  The last version with synchronous code was `0.4.1`.
- Rename `address`/`-a` to `unit`/`-u` to match Alicat's documentation
- Rename `-u` to `-ul` (for `--unlock`)

`0.4.1`
Remove TCP support.  Use `pip install alicat==0.3.1` if needed

Commit message:

Add support for BASIS meters and controllers (#96)
Add support for BASIS meters and controllers (https://github.com/alexrudd2/alicat/pull/96)

---------

Co-authored-by: Alex Ruddick <alex@ruddick.tech>

README.md, after:

alicat
======

TCP/Serial driver and command line tool for
[Alicat Laminar DP](https://www.alicat.com/gas-products/laminar-dp-mass-flow-meters-and-controllers/) and [BASIS mass flow](https://www.alicat.com/products/gas-flow/mass-flow-controller/small-thermal-mass-flow-controllers/) devices.

<p align="center">
  <img src="https://www.alicat.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/05/M_MC_Pair.webp" width="40%" />
  <img src="https://www.alicat.com/wp-content/uploads/2024/11/BASIS-controller-prod-600px.webp" width="40%" />
</p>

*If you are using Analyt-MTC flow controllers, go to [this repository](https://github.com/schlenzmeister/AnalytMTC/wiki) for more info.*
*This driver does not currently support CODA devices.*

Example Connections
===================

| Type | Usage |
| --- | --- |
| The standard [DB9 cable](https://store.alicat.com/collections/communication-cables/products/md8db9-8-pin-mini-din-to-serial-adapter-cable) connected directly to a computer (unix: `/dev/ttyS0`, windows: `COM1`). | Good with older computers that still have the connector. |
| The cable connected to a computer through a [USB converter](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B0007T27H8) (unix: `/dev/ttyUSB0`, windows: `COM1`). | Good for newer computers and maker boards such as Raspberry Pis. |
| Multiple cables connected to one port via a [splitter](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007F2E188) and Alicat's addressing (`A`-`Z`). | Good when number of ports is limited. |
| Cables routed through a [TCP device server](https://www.usconverters.com/serial-rs232-ethernet-converter) (`192.168.1.100:23`).

Installation
============

```
pip install alicat
```

Usage
=====

## Command Line

For basic tasks, this driver includes a command-line interface. Read the help
for more.

```
alicat --help
```

## Python
This uses Python ≥3.5's async/await syntax to asynchronously communicate with an Alicat. For example:

```python
import asyncio
from alicat import FlowController

async def get():
    async with FlowController(address = "com_port", unit = "unit_id") as flow_controller:
        print(await flow_controller.get())

asyncio.run(get())
#  If there is already an event loop (e.g. Jupyter), replace the above line with:
#  sawait get()
```

A similar format can be used to communicate with a BASIS device.

```python
import asyncio
from alicat.basis import BasisController

async def get():
    async with BasisController(address = "com_port", unit = "unit_id") as basis_controller:
        print(await basis_controller.get())

asyncio.run(get())
```

If the flow controller is communicating on the specified port, this should
return a dictionary of the form:

```python
## Standard Devices
{
  'setpoint': 0.0,         # Setpoint, either mass flow rate or pressure
  'control_point': 'flow', # Either 'flow' or 'pressure'
  'gas': 'Air',            # Can be any option in `flow_controller.gases`
  'mass_flow': 0.0,        # Mass flow (in units specified at time of purchase)
  'pressure': 25.46,       # Pressure (normally in psia)
  'temperature': 23.62,    # Temperature (normally in C)
  'total_flow': 0.0,       # Optional. If totalizer function purchased, will be included
  'volumetric_flow': 0.0   # Volumetric flow (in units specified at time of purchase)
}

## BASIS Devices
{
  'setpoint': 0.0,         # Mass Flow Setpoint
  'gas': 'Air',            # Can be Air, Ar, CO2, N2, O2, N2O, H2, He, CH4
  'mass_flow': 0.0,        # Mass flow (in SCCM or SLPM)
  'temperature': 23.62,    # Temperature (normally in C)
  'volumetric_flow': 0.0   # Volumetric flow (in CCM or LPM)
}
```

On flow controllers, you can set the flow or pressure setpoints.

```python
await flow_controller.set_flow_rate(1.0)
await flow_controller.set_pressure(20)
```

### Gas Type

You can set the gas type by name or by index. For more on setting by index, see the gas table in your Alicat's manual.

```python
await flow_controller.set_gas('N2')
await flow_controller.set_gas(8)
```

For firmware 5v and greater, you can create and set gas mixes. Mixes can contain up to five gases and are stored in gas indices 236-255.

```python
await flow_controller.create_mix(mix_no=236, name="Mix1", gases={'N2': 50, 'O2': 30, 'CO2': 20})
await flow_controller.set_gas(236)
await flow_controller.delete_mix(236)
```

### PID Parameters

For flow controllers, read and write PID loop settings for device tuning.

```python
await flow_controller.set_pid(p=4000, i=4000, d=10, loop_type='PD2I')
print(await flow_controller.get_pid())
{
    'loop_type': 'PD2I',
    'P': '4000',
    'I': '4000',
    'D': '10',
}
```

### Other Features

Additional features include override commands to increase device functionality.

```python
await flow_controller.lock()            # Lock the front display.
await flow_controller.unlock()          # Unlock the front display.
await flow_controller.hold()            # Hold the valve in its current position.
await flow_controller.cancel_hold()     # Cancel the valve hold.
await flow_controller.tare_volumetric() # Tare volumetric flow.
await flow_controller.tare_pressure()   # Tare pressure.
await flow_controller.reset_totalizer() # Reset totalizer, if totalizer functionality included.
```

### Addressing

You can have multiple controllers on the same port by using Alicat's `A`-`Z` addresses
and an [RS-232 splitter](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/B007F2E188).

```python
flow_controller_1 = FlowController(address='A')
flow_controller_2 = FlowController(address='B')

await flow_controller_1.set_flow_rate(1.0)
await flow_controller_2.set_flow_rate(0.5)

await flow_controller_1.close() # /dev/ttyUSB0 is still open!
await flow_controller_2.close()
```

### Breaking changes

`0.5.0`
- Support only `asyncio`.  The last version with synchronous code was `0.4.1`.
- Rename `address`/`-a` to `unit`/`-u` to match Alicat's documentation
- Rename `-u` to `-ul` (for `--unlock`)

`0.4.1`
Remove TCP support.  Use `pip install alicat==0.3.1` if needed
